From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Michael Baro. This is the Daily.
[music]
As 2026 gets underway, so does a midterm
election year for control of Congress, a
campaign that will determine whether
Democrats [music] can operate as a check
against the extraordinary power of
President Trump or whether [music]
Republicans can hold on to every lever
of influence in Washington.
Today, my colleagues Annie [music]
Carney and Shane Goldmacher on the
opportunities and perils for both
parties.
It's Wednesday, [music] January 7th.
Annie, 2026 elections, here we come.
>> Here we come.
>> Or I guess here we are. This episode is
going to be kind of a road map and a
primer for this year ahead in American
politics because while a lot of eyes are
on Venezuela right now in Congress,
which you cover, the focus is on the
reality that it is an election year, a
very big midterm election year coming up
in November. And November sounds very
far away, but as you know well in
politics that really isn't very much
time at all and there's just a ton at
stake in this election. So we are
turning to you to talk about the
Republican side of that election and how
Republicans in Congress are now thinking
about planning for or perhaps dreading
this coming election.
>> I think that dreading is the correct
word here. Republicans ended last year
feeling very pessimistic about their
chance of holding on to control of the
House and that's in a really large part
because their party has failed to fix
what ails the American economy right now
>> namely high prices
>> high prices high utility bills Americans
can look at their receipts and they are
not doing well right now
>> right the receipts for the failure are
literally the receipts
>> correct
And nothing better illustrates the dire
situation the Republicans are walking
into this election year than the fact
that Republicans set themselves up to
start the year on an issue, healthcare,
that has for years been their biggest
weakness politically.
>> And just explain that why Republicans
are going to be kicking off 2026 on
healthcare. Because in the final weeks
of 2025,
congressional Republicans were so
despondent about their overall failure
to confront affordability that a handful
of them actually break with their party
leadership and join with Democrats to
force a vote on extending subsidies to
the Affordable Care Act. So, this vote
is coming to the floor against Mike
Johnson's wishes and highlighting an
issue where voters by and large think
Democrats are much stronger when it
comes to healthcare.
>> Right. And just as a political matter,
what the Republicans did in the final
weeks of December was enormous because
they basically voted to endorse in a
real sense the Affordable Care Act,
which is public enemy number one for
many congressional Republicans and has
been for a decade. And and you're
suggesting that they're going to
reinforce that approval for the ACA in
the coming days.
Yeah, Republicans have been divided
about what to do about the ACA for
years, but this is how much swing
district moderate Republicans are
feeling the heat that they feel like
they needed to join Democrats and to
fight for these extensions or risk
losing their seats. And just because
we're on the subject, will the
Republicans breaking with their party
help pass the extension of these
Affordable Care Act subsidies in the
House in the next couple days?
>> It could pass in the House, but it
doesn't seem that Republicans are going
to pass it in the Senate. And the
president would never sign this into
law. He would not want to reward
Democrats who have made this ACA
extension the central message of their
entire political strategy.
>> Right? So, we're going to begin this
year in the next couple days with
Republicans having a big public battle
among themselves.
one that's gonna probably create a
spectacle that reinforces the Democratic
strategy that Republicans don't get it
on affordability, especially the
affordability of health care. That's how
Republicans are starting this election
year,
>> right? I have to say that Tony Forbzio,
Republican pollster who works for Trump,
put out a memo last summer warning
Republicans at all levels that if they
did not get behind these ACA tax
credits, it would be political
malpractice and a disaster for the
party.
>> Now, some Republicans will say it's
still early. There's a long way to go to
November. They have plenty of time to
change the conversation, but this is
most definitely not how they wanted to
start off this election year.
>> Well, put this fight over healthcare
into the larger much larger context of
dread that Republicans seem to be
feeling right now heading into the
midterms, even if, as they say, they
have plenty of time in theory to try to
recover their footing.
So this is, you know, the latest chapter
in a much bigger story about an
incredibly frustrated, demoralized party
right now. All year the White House has
been driving this strategy of doing
redistricting across the country,
starting with Texas. And this was always
viewed as something that you do if you
are worried about winning the regular
maps as they are drawn now. you would
only bother to redistrict if you thought
it would give you a political edge. So,
the White House pushed this in states
across the country where they thought
they could gain a few seats,
>> right? By literally writing Democrats
and their voters out of these
congressional maps,
>> right? But here is where a Democratic
leadership that has widely disappointed
voters for a long time really showed
some backbone and pushed back. Hakeim
Jeff, Democrat of New York and minority
leader, was very aggressive in
supporting tit fortat on redistricting.
If they're going to do Texas, we're
going to do California.
>> So, it's basically set off an arms race
that is adding up to pretty much a wash.
H
>> it's not clear that the redistricting
battles across the country have given
Republicans anywhere near the margin
that they would need to feel confident
about keeping the House,
>> right? Which means Republicans have to
try to win the oldfashioned way, running
on their record,
>> right? And they don't have a lot to run
on.
>> They've had full control in Washington
for a year now, and they've really only
passed one bill, the big beautiful bill,
>> which is something.
>> It's something. and they want to
highlight the tax cuts, but that bill
also included deep cuts to Medicaid that
affect their voters,
>> right?
>> So, it was an unproductive Congress.
They've basically just said yes to
everything that the White House wants or
just been totally cut out of the White
House's decision-making process, whether
it's shutting down federal agencies or
carrying out last week's military
operation in Venezuela, which Congress
was kept totally in the dark about.
They've given up their power and they've
just become miserable in the process.
[snorts]
>> So, the morale in the House is just
terrible. And when when Marjorie Taylor
Green announced that she was resigning
and leaving early, a lot of her
colleagues kind of felt jealous
privately, they would tell me like that
sounds great was [laughter]
was how a lot of House Republicans felt
when they heard that news. And are many
of them thinking about or deciding to
follow her out the door?
>> So what she did is, you know, announced
that she's leaving early before the end
of her term, which really doesn't happen
unless you have a health issue or a huge
scandal. I mean, it's, you know, your
voters elected you to serve out your
term. So I don't think anyone else is
going to follow her out early. But a lot
of people are choosing not to run again.
>> Today, I am announcing I'm not running
for reelection. One of the biggest
examples this year would be Don Bacon.
>> Suddenly I feel emotional.
It's been a great 10 years.
>> He's kind of an oldfashioned Republican,
a moderate from Nebraska. And he
announced that he's going to retire.
That's a huge blow to Republicans
chances of keeping the House.
>> Why?
>> Because that seat will likely go to a
Democrat in the next election,
>> right?
>> But it's not just moderates like Don
Bacon who are leaving Congress. We've
seen some lawmakers who call themselves
ultra maga head for the exits. Elise
Stefonic in the days before Christmas
said she's going to retire at the end of
her term.
>> Having a member of the leadership team
come out and suggest that the speaker
was a liar that he was a political
novice that he was all sorts of things
that Elise Stefonic said is just unheard
of.
>> She's been incredibly fed up with
[music] Speaker Johnson's leadership of
the House. has been criticizing publicly
and saying she's felt mistreated by him.
>> Um I I don't exactly know why Elise
won't [music] just call me. I texted her
yesterday. Um she's upset
>> privately. She's been frustrated with
Donald Trump and his treatment of her.
[music] You have Nancy Mace,
>> Republican Congresswoman Nancy Mace of
South Carolina has an op-ed in the New
York Times entitled, "What's the point
of Congress?"
>> who has also been publicly critical of
[music] Mike Johnson. She writes in
part, quote, "Nancy Pelosi was a more
effective House Speaker than any
Republican this century.
>> She's not going to run for reelection,
[music] trying to run for governor of
South Carolina instead." So, those two
women really just speak to how
demoralized a lot of Republicans, even
those who [music] have fashioned
themselves after Trump, are feeling
right now.
>> [music]
>> So with House Republicans being both
unable to conquer the affordability
issue
>> Mhm.
>> and becoming miserable in their jobs in
the House, some of them retiring and
making the seats very getable for
Democrats. Others like Nancy Mace, Alise
Stefonic retiring and I assume the seats
will just be filled by other
Republicans. What is
>> the strategy
>> for the Republicans in the midterms?
What are they saying their message is
going to be if they don't really like
the message that's attached to them at
the moment?
>> Look, a lot of them think that
affordability will be the strategy and
they have time to talk about it in a
convincing way to their constituents
even if the president is calling it a
hoax. We'll see if that's going to work
for them. Then, you know, I think for
Republicans in competitive districts,
the strategy is going to be saying, "I
stood up to my party. I force this vote
on affordable care act subsidies
extension. That will be their case
they're making,
>> right?
>> Which will be a hard sell because at the
end of the day, the subsidies will not
pass. So, I mean, what they did amounts
to a little more than messaging, which
can only take you really so far if the
lives of your constituents are still
worse off while you were in office. And
then they're left with this hope that
Democrats run people like Zora Mamani
who are far-left and progressive and
socialist and convince their voters that
that's the alternative broadly speaking
and brand Democrats as radicals even
when in some districts, you know,
they're absolutely not. So, what do you
think the best case scenario for
congressional Republicans, especially in
the House, will be over the next 10
months or so? I mean, I'm not asking you
to guess numerically what's going to
happen in November's election, but in
the Republicans minds, how does this go
really well and how does it go real real
bad?
>> Right. I mean, I'd say that the best
case is that they buck conventionalism
and hold the House. They lose a few
Senate seats, but hold the Senate. And I
guess the worst case scenario, which I
think is the one that more Republicans
are really entertaining,
is this bad blood between Republican
rank and file members and Speaker Mike
Johnson, could lead to, you know,
ousting their own speaker before the
midterms. That's a possibility. could
mean a loss of the House by a wider
margin than anyone even thinks. And then
Democrats controlling all of the key
committees in the final years of Trump's
presidency, which would mean the
oversight committee and the judiciary
committee potentially doing real
investigations and demanding information
from all these agencies that are not
sharing information with Congress. They
would have subpoena power. So it would
change the dynamic in Washington
dramatically for Democrats to regain
control of the House.
>> Right. Thus the Republican dread.
>> Correct.
[music]
>> Well, Annie, thank you for that. I
appreciate it.
>> Thank you for having me. Happy New Year.
>> Cheers.
after the break. Shane Goldmarker on
[music] the Democrats.
We'll be right back.
Jane Michael, thank you for representing
the Democratic side of the ledger in our
conversation here. If, as Annie Carney
just told us, Republicans are filled
with dread about their prospects,
especially in the House in this year's
upcoming midterm elections, doesn't that
almost certainly mean that Democrats are
filled with whatever the opposite of
dread is? And what would that be?
>> I would say that Democrats are broadly
filled with an anxious optimism. And the
reasons to be optimistic are pretty
clear. They see overperformances in
special elections victories in November
and Trump's slipping approval ratings on
the most important issues to voters
prices and the economy. And they say
this is the kind of political
environment the Democrats were hoping
for at the end of Donald Trump's first
year.
>> One where he seems to be openly fumbling
on the economy and mocking the idea of
affordability. not just mocking it at
times, but showing that he is focused on
other things that are personal to
himself. Whether it is
>> Trump Kennedy Center,
>> yeah, Trump Kennedy Center, gilding
parts of the Oval Office, building a
ballroom while the government was shut
down. That was his focus at the end of
2025. And 2026 began with a focus on
foreign affairs, on Venezuela, right,
>> with the arrest of Nicholas Maduro. and
it doesn't exactly fit with the America
first branding that he ran on. This is
hardly a kitchen table issue for most
Americans. And I think all of these
things have fed into this image of a
president who is focused on himself, on
[snorts] his reputation in history
rather than the personal finances of the
Americans who voted to make him
president. And so I think that Democrats
are starting to think that that image of
a president who is distracted, who is
self-indulgent, that that is starting to
break through. And the trust that voters
have had recently and historically in
the Republican party to fix the economy
is waning. And plus, just historically,
the party in power loses seats in the
midterms, right? And the margins
Republicans have are so small and so
slim that even like a nonwave year
should give Democrats a majority.
>> And when you say margins, what you
simply mean is of course that there are
literally only a handful of Republicans
in the Republican House majority. So
even if they lose what three, four, five
seats, Democrats suddenly control the
United States House of Representatives.
And so the environment is the reason for
optimism right now for Democrats. But
the anxiousness comes from some of the
other factors which is well what are
those seats and what does the map
actually look like? And historically
there have been a ton of seats that have
been up for grabs in the House of
Representatives and that number is
shrinking and shrinking and it's really
important because it means even if there
is a quote unquote blue wave. Let's say
Democrats overperform by seven or eight
percentage points from what they did in
2024. Well, that doesn't capture as many
Republican seats as it might have a
decade ago.
>> And if you take all the seats that are
in the toss-up category and the leaning
Democratic seats, and you give them all
to the Democrats, right, all the most
competitive seats, they end up in like
the low 220s and you need 218 seats in
the House for a majority. So, even
sweeping these tossup seats just gets
the Democrats over the line. Mhm. And is
this reality that even a blue wave won't
get Democrats that many seats, is that
just the extension of the conversation
we've been having with you for years?
The fact that there's been so much
partisan gerrymandering, there just
really aren't any purple seats left.
>> It's partly partisan gerrymandering.
It's also sort of a broader trend in
America, which is self- sorting by
voters. The blue areas are getting bluer
and the red areas are getting redder.
And so even if you're not intending to
jerrymander people, they've self-
selected into
>> right, we talked about this the self
gerrymandering.
>> Yeah. Into their own communities. And so
it's that combination that's led to a
shrunken map that leaves less margin for
error for Democrats.
>> What else beyond a map that makes it
kind of hard for anybody to really pick
up all that many seats will make
Democrats anxious about 2026?
>> The candidates, right? The Democratic
party has an unusually large number of
intense primaries that they're facing
next year because when you're tossed
from power, you have some introspection.
What did you do? Where did you go wrong?
And who do you want to represent you in
the future?
>> And across the map, there are these
primaries that are testing some of the
disagreements that the Democratic party
has. And so, who emerges in those races
is also going to be a pretty important
factor. You know, we said the Democrats
have a pretty good chance to take the
House. It's really hard for them to take
the Senate at the same time. Why?
Republicans have 53 seats in the Senate,
and there just aren't very many
opportunities for the Democrats to win
the Senate in 2026. There's Susan
Collins, who is the only Republican
senator in a state that Donald Trump
lost in 2024. You've got North Carolina.
It's an open seat. You've got Sherid
Brown, the former Democratic senator
from Ohio, running again. But like even
if they won all three of those states,
Democrats are still not back in the
majority. That would only get them back
to 50,
>> right? And 50 is not enough when the
president is Republican because JD Vance
would break the tie in favor of
Republicans.
>> And Democrats have, by the way, their
own vulnerable seats up too, right? They
have to win all those and hold their own
seats. And there's real fear in House
races and in Senate races that the party
will end up nominating people who are
either outside the mainstream, who have
bad baggage, and end up costing them
potentially winnable races.
>> Let's talk about some of these
primaries. And what you're hinting at is
a fight that both parties have been
having for such a long time, which is is
it healthier for a party to have
primaries where candidates sort out
which kind of Republican, which kind of
Democrat they want to be in the general
election or is it just distracting and
costly and does it damage the candidate
for the general election? It sounds like
Democrats have kind of made that
decision for themselves. You're saying
there are a lot of primaries. What are
the main lines of conflict in these
primaries in a place for example like
Maine?
>> There's a number of lanes the Democratic
party has disagreements over. The first
is ideological. Are you a progressive?
Are you a moderate? The second is a
generational fight. Are you from the old
guard? Are you from the new guard or the
next generation? And one of the places
that that is playing out is in Maine.
You know, my father was a seventh
generation mayor who stood up for people
who couldn't stand up for themselves.
>> You've got the two-term Democratic
governor who's seen as a moderate. Janet
Mills, sort of the perfect vision of
what a traditional top recruit is.
>> Trump rips [music] away health care from
millions of Americans and drives up
costs on everything from groceries to
housing [music] to trucks and cars.
>> She's a proven winner. She's the kind of
person you would exactly want to run in
that kind of place. This election
[music] will be a simple choice. Is
Maine going to bow down or stand up? I
know my answer.
>> And yet, she's facing a pretty stiff
primary challenge from a guy named
Graham Platner, who's gotten a lot of
attention.
>> When I tell people around here that I'm
running for Senate, sometimes the
initial reaction is, "What the?" But
right there, [laughter]
>> an oyster farmer, a veteran.
>> I did four infantry tours in the Marine
Corps in the Army. I'm not afraid to
name an enemy and the enemy is the
oligarchy.
>> But also has gotten in a lot of
controversy over a tattoo that he
tattooed over that had Nazi symbolism
over a bunch of Reddit posts that he'
made in the past. And there's a lot in
the party say so what? He's unvarnished.
He's real. He looks like he solves all
the problems that we've identified that
the Democratic party had in 2024. I
truly do believe that we can build a
system that is going to represent
working [music] people. The number one
response has been, "Well, thank God
somebody's going to do it."
>> And guess who held one of the first big
rallies for him? Bernie Sanders, who's
playing in a number of these Senate
primaries. And so, who emerges in these
states is a real real focus and concern
for both sides of the party. Right?
There are people who point at Janet Mill
say, "Okay, sure, she looks like a great
recruit, but guess what? She would be
the oldest freshman senator in American
history." Hm. So, right after Joe Biden,
do you want to go back to that or do you
want to take a risk at this really
young, potentially inspiring guy, but
who has said things that are easily
clippable in Republican attack ads,
self-escribing themselves in ways that
cast him as a radical and Republicans
just love to use that kind of term,
especially when candidates have used it
in their own words.
>> Right? This is what Annie described as
the kind of fantasy of Republicans that
they can turn the entire 2026 Democratic
slate of candidates into far-left out of
the mainstream mom Donnie Platner on and
on.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> But we have no idea whether the reality
is that these Democratic primary
challengers might end up winning the
primary and winning the general
election. I would think about it as
there are two competing wings
strategically in the Democratic party.
Wing one wants to focus entirely on who
on paper is the most electable candidate
in 2026 because it is so urgent to take
back power and have a check against
Trump and have a check on Trump. That
let's do that. Whoever in each state
looks like they are likeliest to win, do
that. and let's hold off on this
conversation of populist versus
progressive versus institutionalist.
Let's not have that fight in 2026.
>> Reminder, not having that fight in 2024.
Pretty problematic.
>> Ended up with Trump, right? And and so
they say that fight's going to happen in
the presidential primary in 2028. Right
now, we don't want that fight. And
there's a whole wing that says actually
the primaries in 2026 are the appetizer
to a main course in 2028 that have this
fight.
>> These populist these lefty candidates,
we need to prove that we can win in the
midterms in order to have a chance to
sell the broader Democratic electorate
that the left can win in 2028. And so
that's why all of these primaries for
the Senate have become so interesting
and so important and real proxy tests
for the direction of the Democratic
party beyond the midterms.
>> Right. Okay. So, with all of this
extremely useful context that justifies
the term anxious [clears throat]
optimism, I wonder if you can give us
the best case scenario for Democrats in
these midterm elections, House and
Senate, and then the worst case scenario
for them.
>> I mean, how much fun can we have with
this?
>> That's entirely up to you, Mr.
Goldmacher. I mean, I think the best
case scenario for Democrats is that
Donald Trump continues remodeling
bathrooms and focusing on things that
voters don't care about. That they beat
Susan Collins, that they have a wave of
these new recruits, they win dozens of
seats in the House, and they take power
entirely in the Congress next fall.
>> Um, [snorts]
>> that's the best case.
>> That's the best case scenario, right?
politically like there is just so much
that could go wrong for both parties
still that the extremes of what is the
best case scenario for Democrats and for
Republicans, they're pretty extreme.
>> Okay. Well, speaking of worst case
scenarios, what is it for the Democrats?
>> It's that Donald Trump starts focusing
on the economy that he sends checks to
everybody in the country and he calls
them Trump checks and they come in
October just as everyone's casting
ballots. He releases oil from the
strategic petroleum reserve and gas
prices plummet. his new Federal Reserve
chair cuts interest rates. Everyone buys
homes. Things suddenly seem cheaper. And
people credit Donald Trump for fixing
all of these things all at once. And
Republicans don't just hold all those
Senate seats we're talking about. They
flip Democratic seats and grow their
Senate majority. Democrats somehow come
up short in the House despite all of the
strategic benefits. And they have a
4-year term for Donald Trump and
complete Republican control in Congress.
I don't think either of those extremes
are the likeliest outcome and I think
that the Republican outcome is even less
likely between those two. But there's a
big range of possibilities for 2026.
I'll say
[music]
well Shane thank you very much and happy
new year to you. Happy new year. [music]
>> On Tuesday, in a speech [music] to
congressional Republicans, President
Trump beseeched them to try to keep
control of Congress in this year's
midterm elections [music] in order to
protect himself from a Democratic
majority.
>> [music]
>> You got to win the midterms because if
we don't win the midterms,
it's just going to be
I mean, they'll find a reason to impeach
me. Uh, I'll get impeached.
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
[music]
On Tuesday, European officials expressed
alarm over the Trump administration's
suggestion made in the days since they
ousted Nicholas Maduro [music] that the
United States could next take over
Greenland.
>> The real question is by what right does
Denmark assert control over Greenland?
What is the basis of their territorial
claim? That [music] suggestion was
reinforced by Trump's top adviser,
Steven Miller, who told CNN, that as
[music] a matter of national security in
its own hemisphere, the United States
has a rightful claim [music] to
Greenland. For the United States to
secure the Arctic region, to protect and
defend NATO and NATO interest, obviously
Greenland should be part of the United
States. And so, that's a conversation
that we're going to have as a country.
That's a process. In an unusual joint
statement signed by leaders from
Denmark, [music] France, Germany,
Britain, Italy, Spain, and Poland,
European officials [music]
rejected Miller's logic and declared
that Greenland's future should be
determined only by Denmark [music] and
the people of Greenland.
[music] Today's episode was produced by
Jessica Chong, OA Cherved, and Caitlyn
[music] O'Keefe. It was edited by Rachel
Quester, contains music by Dan Powell
and Alicia Etub, and was engineered by
Chris Wood.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Mabaro.
See you tomorrow.